16 this evening, and as you turn to this passage of Scripture, I will say at the onset of the
message this evening that the content of Exodus 16 is familiar to many believers.
It is here in Exodus chapter number 16 that we read about the manna that God provided
for His people.
And what an amazing, miraculous, just matter of provision this was for the people of God,
and we find that as we look at the passage of Scripture, that as God revealed His plan
to Moses, really as we see specifically in verse number 4, God said this, He said that
I may prove them whether they will walk in My law or no.
Isn't that interesting?
God said to Moses, here's the plan that I'm going to give.
I understand the current situation.
I am aware of these things.
And I've heard the murmuring of the people, and here's what I'm going to do.
Here's how I am going to work.
But in so doing, I'm going to prove them.
I'm going to prove them.
He said that I may prove them whether they will walk in My law or no.
As we read the passage of Scripture, we read of the record of the miraculous provision,
but we also find how God would test His people.
The word prove means to test or to try.
As a backdrop to the event here that's recorded in Exodus chapter number 16 and the miracle
that is here, we would certainly understand that this group of people, the children of
Israel that are living and breathing during Exodus chapter number 16, these people had
seen God work miraculously.
These people are the very people that were in bondage in Egypt that cried out to God,
and God through the series of plagues had demonstrated His power.
We find that they come to the Red Sea, and of course, the Red Sea is before them, and
the army of the Egyptians is behind them.
And yet again, God would work miraculously and deliver them and allow them to cross the
Red Sea on dry ground.
After they sing in Exodus chapter number 15, the song of Moses is referred to, and they
are jubilant and exalting the Lord for all the work that He did.
We find that the chapter ends in Exodus chapter number 15 with complaining about the bitter
water of Marah.
It's there that God healed the waters.
And we come to chapter number 16, and again we see that this group of people that had
experienced and had been eyewitness of what God had done and how God had worked miraculously,
that once again they're confronted with a trial, they're confronted with a problem,
they murmur, they complain, and God is going to supernaturally provide for them.
But in that provision, there was a test.
This evening, I ask myself the question, and I want you to ask yourself this question.
It's the title of the message this evening, would you have passed the test?
Would you have passed the test?
The reality is that I believe that my immediate answer and maybe your immediate answer, we
would like to say, yes, absolutely, I would have passed the test.
But I hope that we do some serious evaluation this evening.
That we would really consider and not just give an answer that's an off-the-cuff kind
of an answer, an immediate response.
See, the reality is that there are times even today in our lives that God is testing us,
He's proving us.
And many times we don't even know it.
We have no idea.
It's one thing when the professor says, you're going to have a test next Thursday, and here's
the content of the subject matter that will be covered on the test, and you have some
time to prepare.
You're aware of it.
There was a professor that we had in college, his name was Dr. Bish.
And he was a happy-go-lucky fella.
He had been a pastor for a number of years at a church, and he'd retired, and he was
teaching in Bible college, and he was a well-loved professor.
He really was.
And he was a knowledgeable man, he was a practical man.
But every once in a while, he'd walk into class, and I remember the very first time
he ever walked into class this way, and he walked in, and he walked in like this.
And you just thought he was happy, right?
And he says, you know what that is?
No idea.
I'd never seen him do it.
He said, that's a pop test.
Put your books away, take out a paper and pencil.
And you know what happened?
Everyone said, oh.
Why?
I had not prepared, I had not studied, I had not planned for that test.
I would submit to you this evening that the children of Israel, the congregation, Moses
understands as God says to Moses, I'm going to prove them.
But the children of Israel, the people, I don't think they knew that this was a test.
God was proving them.
Notice with me in verse number one as we dig into the passage of Scripture, the Bible says
they took their journey from Elam, and all the congregation of the children of Israel
came unto the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elam and Sinai, on the fifteenth day
of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.
Now you understand, it says here, on the fifteenth day of the second month, seventy-five
days roughly, yeah?
Since they had seen great miracles in the land of Egypt, since they had crossed over
the Red Sea on dry land, and the Bible says in verse number two, if you're taking notes,
number one, the problem.
We're going to spend most of our time on the final point this evening, so that we can grab
the entire context, and verses two and three, the problem is given to us.
The Bible says the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses
and Aaron in the wilderness.
The children of Israel said unto them, would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord
in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we did eat bread to the full.
Now, many of you, if you are familiar with the Scriptures, you understand that while
they were in Egypt, they were complaining about the hardship of Egypt, correct?
God heard their cries, right?
And now they're saying, oh, that we would have died there, it was so much better there,
we sat by the flesh pots and we ate bread to the full, and so we see that they're murmuring
and we see that they have this idea that we're going to die of hunger.
The end of verse number three, for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness to kill
this whole assembly with hunger.
Now, not only had God miraculously delivered His people, but He had just healed the bitter
waters of Marah.
By the way, they thought they were going to die there, right?
And God had miraculously healed those waters so that they could have drink, and then in
just a matter of time, now we're going to die of hunger.
Isn't that amazing?
To see the perspective of the children of Israel, to see the negativity.
It is interesting to know as we look through the entirety of the passage and make note
of various statements that are made here throughout the passages of interest in verse number 12,
and we must understand this, that God knows everything.
You notice that the Scriptures say that they murmured against Moses and Aaron, but really
their complaint was against God.
Why?
For it was God that was leading them.
We find that the Bible tells us in verse number 12, God is speaking.
He says, I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel.
He knows everything.
Amen?
He is omniscient.
As we look at the passage of Scripture, I would readily admit that the problem that
they faced was a real problem.
It was a real problem.
They did not have any food.
We understand that, I believe that there was some level of exaggeration, there was some
despair and we find that they respond in a manner that is not appropriate, but we find
that it was a real problem.
Listen, we face real problems in life.
I would submit to you this evening that the Red Sea was a real problem for the children
of Israel.
I would submit to you this evening that the bitter waters of Morrow was a real problem
for the children of Israel, just as this situation was a real problem that they faced.
We face problems, but we have a God who is able.
The same God who handled the Red Sea, the same God who handled Pharaoh's army, the same
God who healed those bitter waters, certainly He is able to provide food.
Amen?
So we see the provision, number two, the provision.
We see the problem, but we find that the provision in verses 4 and 5, and then we'll skip down
and read a few verses later in the passage, but we find that with the provision came some
instruction.
Verse number four, the Bible says,
then said the Lord unto Moses,
behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you.
Isn't that amazing?
I mean, just pause and just think about that.
See, here's the problem sometimes in our own lives
is that we know about manna.
Right? We know, oh yeah, they had manna.
In fact, many of us could talk about
the fact that they had it for 40 years.
We know at the end of the passage it talks about that.
As soon as they entered into the land of promise,
the manna ceased and they ate from the fruit of the land.
And we studied that as we went through the book of Joshua.
But can you imagine being there?
God said, I'm gonna rain bread from heaven.
This is not a normal thing.
It's a miraculous thing.
God is showing His power.
God is showing His ability to care for His people.
And we find that the Bible says
that He would rain bread from heaven for you.
And notice it says, and the people shall go out
and gather a certain rate every year,
every day, excuse me,
that I may prove them
whether they will walk in my law or no.
And it shall come to pass that on the sixth day,
they shall prepare that which they bring in
and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.
And Moses and Aaron said,
and all the children of Israel even,
that ye shall know that the Lord hath brought you out
from the land of Egypt and in the morning,
then ye shall see the glory of the Lord
for that He heareth your murmurings against the Lord
and what are we that ye murmur against us?
And Moses said, this shall be
when the Lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat
and in the morning bread to the full
for that the Lord heareth your murmurings
which you murmur against Him.
And what are we?
Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord.
And Moses spake unto Aaron in verse nine,
saying to all the congregation of the children of Israel,
come near before the Lord
for He hath heard your murmurings
and it came to pass as Aaron spake
unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel
that they looked toward the wilderness
and behold, the glory of the Lord appeared in the cloud
and the Lord spake unto Moses saying,
I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel.
Notice what he says that he's going to do.
He says, speak unto them saying,
at even ye shall eat flesh
and in the morning, you shall be filled with bread.
Remember what they said when they complained.
They said that they were in Egypt
and they sat by the flesh pots
and they did eat bread to the full.
God said, at even ye shall eat flesh
and in the morning, you shall be filled with bread.
Notice the end of verse number 12.
And ye shall know that I am the Lord your God.
Not only does He know everything,
but He desires for us to know Him.
He desires for us to know Him.
He desires that we would know what He is capable of doing.
He desires that we would trust Him,
that we would fully rely upon Him,
that we would live by faith,
that we would obey Him.
We find the Bible tells us in verse number 13,
and it came to pass,
isn't that a wonderful statement in Scripture?
And it came to pass that at even,
the quails came up and covered the camp.
And in the morning, the dew lay round about the host.
That phrase in Scripture that you often find,
it came to pass,
is a comforting reminder
that everything that God says, He will do.
He promised that He would provide for His people
and He gives the instruction to Moses
as to how He will do it.
And then the Bible says it came to pass.
He does what He says He will do.
He's never failed and He never will.
Amen?
And we find that, listen,
the reality is that He may not provide for you or me
the way that we think He should,
but He always does right.
His way is perfect.
Amen?
And we find here in verse number 14, it says,
and when the dew that lay was gone up,
behold, upon the face of the wilderness,
there lay a small round thing,
as small as the hoarfrost on the ground.
And when the children of Israel saw it,
they said one to another,
it is manna.
For they wist not what it was.
And Moses said unto them,
this is the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat.
In verse number 35 of the passage of Scripture,
the Bible says, and the children of Israel
did eat manna 40 years.
It's interesting that in just a little while,
they would be complaining about the manna.
In fact, it was an often complaint
of the children of Israel.
They didn't like the way that God had provided for them.
They loathe this bread.
Right? That's what they said.
And the reality is that God
had miraculously provided for them
and they would eat this manna for 40 years.
I mentioned that with the provision came instruction
and that's where we come to our final point this evening.
And that is the proving.
We see the problem, we see the provision,
but we see the proving.
This is where I want to spend the remainder
of our time this evening.
Remember in verse number four,
that as God was revealing to Moses
what it was that He would do,
He says that I may prove them
whether they will walk in My law or no.
Remember the title in which we've used this evening
for our message,
would you have passed the test?
As we look at this proving
and we understand what God was proving them about,
the testing, the trying,
it was whether or not they would walk in His law.
It was really, it was a test of faith.
It was a test of obedience.
Are you going to believe me?
Are you going to obey me?
Right? I mean, that's really what the test is.
That's how God is proving His people
here in Exodus chapter 16.
And I would submit to you this evening
that God continues to prove His people.
In fact, before the feeding of the 5,000,
He says that Jesus asked this question to prove Him.
For He Himself already knew what He would do.
Remember what the sight answer is
of the disciples on that particular day?
200 penny worth isn't enough
that each would just have a little, right?
We don't have enough.
The mindset of the disciples was to send them away.
Right?
God said He asked this question to prove Him.
This evening as we look at this proving
and really we would say that the test
is a test of faith, it's a test of obedience.
Will we believe God?
That's what faith is, taking God at His word.
Believing God.
Will we obey God?
If we disobey God, it really reveals
that we don't believe God.
Would you agree with that?
If we don't obey Him,
it's really revealing that we don't believe Him.
We don't believe that He will do
what He said He will do.
We find in the passage of Scripture
that some passed the test.
Isn't that good?
Some passed.
The Bible actually records for us
in v. 16 as we get some of the instruction,
this is the thing which the Lord had commanded,
hath commanded,
gather of it every man according to his eating,
an omer for every man according to the number of your persons.
Take ye every man for them which are in his tents.
And the children of Israel did so.
And gathered some more, some less.
And when they did meet it with an omer,
he that gathered much had nothing over
and he that gathered little had no lack.
They gathered every man according to his eating.
And Moses said, let no man leave of it till the morning.
So there's some instruction.
We find that there are some that passed the test.
We're going to skip down
to read of some that passed the test
because the very next verse shares with us
about some that failed the test.
So skip down with me and look in v. 24.
And really, let's back up to v. 23
because this is dealing with the sixth day
and the fact that they were to gather a double portion.
We saw that in v. 5
when God had initially given the instruction to Moses.
Moses then gives it to the people in v. 22.
And it came to pass that on the sixth day,
they gathered twice as much bread.
Two omers for one man
and all the rulers of the congregation
came and told Moses and he said unto them,
this is that which the Lord hath said.
Tomorrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord.
Bake that which you will bake today
and see that you will see.
Then that which remaineth over,
lay up for you to be kept until the morning.
Now until the sixth day,
what happened with anything that you left over?
It stank.
Grew worms, right?
We'll read it in just a moment.
You can see that in v. 20.
The Bible tells us that that's what happened.
And so we find that here they come to that sixth day
and the Bible tells us in v. 24,
and they laid it up till the morning as Moses bade.
And I love the rest of the verse.
And it did not stink.
Neither was there any worm therein.
They obeyed God.
They passed the test.
Can I tell you that on that first week,
that first sixth day,
what would you have done?
You knew that on day number one, two, three, four, or five,
anyone within the congregation, and by the...
way, there were some that did store it up, that it stank and it bred worms. What
would you have done? So if I store it up on day four, it spoils, it stinks, it bred
worms. But on day number six, God said store it up. Am I gonna pass the test or
I'm gonna fail the test? Am I going to believe God? Am I going to obey God? Amen?
Listen, I believe on the second week it would have been a lot easier to store up.
Right? Why? Because you saw what happened. Correct? But I'm talking about the first
week. I'm talking about the first sixth day. What would we have done? Would we have
believed God? Would I have believed God? Again, as I said by way of introduction,
I'd love to say yes, absolutely. I would have done exactly what God said. But would
I have? Would you? Do I? Do you? The Bible says, as we continue to look at those that
passed the test in verse 25, and Moses said, eat that today, for today is a Sabbath unto
the Lord. Today ye shall not find it in the field. They had provision that day. Why? Because
they exercised faith. Because they obeyed God. They believed God and they obeyed God.
And therefore they had provision. Isn't that wonderful? Again, we're familiar with Exodus
16. We're familiar with manna. We are familiar with most of the text of Scripture and we
understand what's going on. But I wonder this evening when we really break down and consider
the proving aspect of this passage of Scripture and we find that God says yes, there's a problem
and yes, I can provide, but I'm going to prove them whether they will walk in my law
or no. Will they believe me? Will they obey me? Some passed the test. Aren't you thankful
for that? I'm thankful for those that have gone before us that have walked by faith,
that have obeyed the Lord and His word, that have lived a life of obedience. We sing the
song. In fact, we sang it Sunday evening after we had the baptisms. Trust and obey. That's
faith and obedience. Believing what God said and obeying Him. And here we find that there
were some that passed the test. Unfortunately, there were some that failed the test. Go back
to verse number 20. There were some that failed in those first five days. We don't know exactly
which day it was, but we do see that the Bible says notwithstanding in verse number 20, they
hearken not unto Moses, but some of them left of it until the morning. Now let me ask you,
why would they leave it until the morning? They didn't believe it was going to come tomorrow.
Why else would you leave it until the morning? You don't believe it's going to come. Or you're
lazy and you don't want to go get it. I mean, that's the only other option I could think
of. If you can think of other options, I'm more than happy to hear them, but the only
two options I could think of is one, they don't believe it's going to be there, or two,
they're too lazy to go get it tomorrow. So they say, I'm going to store it up. I believe
that most likely it was reason number one that was what they were guilty of is that
they didn't believe it would be there the next day. Why? Because it's a test of faith.
It's a test of obedience. And so what do they do? Well, they gather more and they store
it up. And the Bible says in verse number 20, that those people that did not hearken
unto Moses, that they, uh, they stored it up. They left it until the morning that it
bred worms and stank and Moses was wroth with them. Now, let me ask you a question. Was the
instruction difficult? It's not hard, right? God says, I'm going to rain. I'm going to,
I'm going to send, here's what I'm going to do. Uh, I am going to rain bread from heaven
for you, but here's the instruction on day one through five, you gather this amount,
you don't store it up. You're going to have to get it on day one. You have your provision
and then next day too, you have your provision. But on day number six, you're going to gather
twice as much a double portion as opposed to, it's not hard instruction. I would submit
to you this evening that most of the instruction in God's word really isn't hard. It really
isn't. It's not hard. It's not challenging. It's not difficult from a, uh, if we're going
to put it on a scale of difficulty from one to 10, it's not breaking the scale on difficulty.
This was pretty simple instruction, but it required faith and it required obedience.
But remember as God's people, the just shall live by faith. Hebrews 11 six without faith,
it is impossible to please him for he that cometh to God must believe that he is and
that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him without faith. It is impossible to
please him. But living by sight is so much easier, but living by faith is such a blessing
because we get to see what God can do. By the way, these people that live by sight,
they found out in a hurry it wasn't easier because it bred worms and stank. Now the same
group of people that failed the test on day number six, they were to gather a double portion,
but perhaps they say, well, I know what happened to these guys over here and they stored up
a double portion a couple of days ago and it stank and bred worms. And so I'm going
to take my chances and I'm going to go try on the seventh day to find my provision because
the Bible tells us in verse number 27 and it came to pass that there went out some of
the people on the seventh day for to gather and they found none. Why did they go gather
on the seventh day? Because they didn't store up a double portion, right? If they had stored
up a double portion, if they had followed, if they had believed God, if they had obeyed
God, there would be no reason for them to go out on the seventh day to try to gather.
They would have had their provision. Those that passed the test in verse number 24 and
25, they had the provision for that seventh day. Moses said, that's what you eat. That's
your provision. And so there's a group of people. We don't know. It says some of the
people that they go out on the seventh day, they go to gather and they find none. And
I want you to notice what God says in verse 28. The Lord said unto Moses, how long refuse
ye to keep my commandments and my laws? See, for that the Lord hath given you the Sabbath.
Therefore he giveth you on the sixth day, the bread of two days. Abide ye every man
in his place. Let no man go out of his place on the seventh day. So the people rested on
the seventh day. I'm not interested in speaking about the 39 years and 51 weeks of manna.
I'm interested mostly with the first week because that's when the test was initially
given. Again, on that second week, it would have been easy to learn from what happened
on week number one. But I wonder in week number one, what would I have done? I ask you to
ask the same question. What would I have done? I'm there. I'm an Israelite. I've experienced
these things that have happened and we have no food. We think that we're going to die
of hunger and God says here's what he's going to do. It's something that I've never seen
happen before. God gives instruction with this miraculous provision. Would I, would
you have passed the test? Some did. Glory to God. Some failed. I wonder this evening
in my life, in your life, how is God proving us? How is God proving us? How is he testing
us? How is he trying us? What is it that he's laid before us to see? Are they really
going to believe me? Is my child, are they really going to believe me? Are they going
to obey me? This evening I wonder, am I walking in his ways? Remember, that's what God said.
He said that I may prove them whether they will walk in my law or no. What I say this
evening, not pridefully, but I say this evening that I'm living by faith. That I'm believing
what God said in his word. That I'm believing that he said I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. That I'm believing that he will provide for me. That he will take care of my needs.
That he is the Lord God Omnipotent. Am I believing his word? And am I obeying his word? Am I
living a life of obedience? See this evening,
We have the privilege of reading
of an account that took place thousands of years ago
in seeking to learn from history.
To learn from this event
in the nation of Israel's history
after they had miraculously crossed over the Red Sea
and they now are in this position
where they have no food
and they think they're going to die of hunger.
And we have the privilege
because God has given us His recorded Word.
He has preserved it for us
that we can see they had a test.
Some passed it.
Some failed.
And this evening, if we could put ourselves
into the account,
would we have passed the test?
I believe this evening each of us,
you probably would say with me,
I'd love to just immediately say, absolutely.
I would have done it exactly like you said.
But I think it's important that we really examine
and say, well, what about today?
It's easy for us to look back at the children of Israel
and say, oh, I wouldn't have done that.
Oh, I would have done that.
But today, am I living by faith?
Am I living a life of obedience?
Am I doing that which pleases the Lord?
Remember, without faith, it's impossible to please Him.
He wants His children to be different.
We live by faith, not by sight.
Amen?
This evening, as we look at this familiar passage
of Scripture in Exodus 16,
I think the Lord challenges me
and I hope He's challenging you.
Would we have passed the test?
Let's pray.
Father, we love You.
We thank You for loving us.
We thank You that You are the Lord God Omnipotent.
We thank You that You do all things well.
That You always do that which You say You will do.
And this evening, as we take a few moments
to examine this passage of Scripture
and to consider the events
that the children of Israel experienced,
two and a half months after leaving Egypt,
they were given a test.
Some passed.
Some failed.
God, I believe that even as You tested
and proved the children of Israel,
that You still prove Your people today.
God, You want us to live a life of faith,
a life of obedience.
In Numbers 14, as the children of Israel
have doubted with that evil report of the ten spies,
You give us insight with regard
to Your desire for Your people.
How long will it be ere they believe Me?
God, help us to be like Paul.
I believe God.
Help us to live a life of faith
and a life of obedience,
believing that You are who You say You are
and You will do what You said You will do.
Help us not to be influenced by this culture,
by the ideologies that permeate our society.
Help us to obey that which we find in Romans 12,
that we would not be conformed to this world.
God, that You would help us to have a biblical worldview
that You would help us to live by faith,
simply trusting, believing You.
I pray that You'd bless our time of prayer.
We thank You for the privilege of prayer.
I pray that You'd be glorified
through the remainder of our service,
and it's in Christ's name we pray, amen.